our housing costs are in Canada where we
have quite a lot of land our housing
costs are generally twice what they are
in the US so we're half as wealthy
approximately and our real estate is
twice as expensive and for what and then
the other environmental conundrum that
perplexes me about Canada is like okay
well people around the world are going
to get their energy somewhere as we can
see by the fact that China is building
Coal Fired plants at a rate that swamps
anything possible as is India as is
India and of course they are and of
course Africa will do the same thing if
if the international neoc colonialists
don't stop them by refusing to lend the
money and so forth which they are so the
developing world is going to develop and
we have absolutely no right whatsoever
to put anything approximating a halt on
that because that really means that
we're killing the world's poor people
and depriving their children of any
opportunity we have no moral right to do
that whatsoever Okay so
then you might say well Canada should be
an example and we could set an example
for Green Technology that the rest of
the world could adopt I mean first of
all no I don't think we can do that
because we're not Innovative enough to
do that and it's also very difficult but
also the best rejoiner to that is well
do you want Europeans the Japanese do
you want them dependent on the
dictatorships that control the oil
supply or Putin and do do you want them
dependent for their energy on
jurisdictions that unlike Canada are
much more LAX in their Environmental
regul ations I mean one thing you can
say about the Canadian fossil fuel
industry is that it's arguably the most
attentive in the world to environmental
considerations now that doesn't make it
perfect but nothing's perfect so again I
don't understand the objection it's like
why can't Canada play its proper role as
provider of raw resources to the world I
have a theory around that and and I mean
certainly there's a lot of the left
thinking that's in there but I actually
think quite frankly we're also being
influenced by other countries us I mean
obviously look if if Canada is exporting
its energy to around the world then
we're not selling cheap energy to the
United States and so there's a there's a
a very specific agenda you think about
it we sell our oil um down to the United
States at a you know $20 a barrel
discount 15 to 20 you know sometimes
more sometimes less but what do they do
they take that oil find it and ship it
out to the east coast and so they make
money on the Arbitrage on this and so
this doesn't make sense to me and
actually one of the reasons why I think
you know it should we have that
opportunity form government I actually
want to try to create a Canada wide Free
Trade Agreement it makes no sense to me
that I can trade easier with the United
States and Mexico than I can with other
provinces we have no sense of who we are
as a country we need to be able to
create that sense as a country so let's
start talking about how we actually
build trade across this country and have
a sense of who we are yeah well RPM
famously announced that we really have
no national identity in Canada right so
as you and I think that that's more what
would you say uh an indication of his
sense of what constitutes Canada his
belief that seems to be quite prevalent
in the west is that there's no uniting
ethos that defines us as a country and I
mean it's a it's a Preposterous notion
and it's unbelievably destructive you
know I think about it so 160 years ago
we had the thinking that brought this
country together right the rail line
tied in the country we had the sense of
who we were you know based on our
identity if we were to take the 10
provinces and the three territories
today and say let's build this entity
called Canada what would we have to do
to achieve that right well obviously you
know trade would be a big part of it but
we'd also have to have a conversation
about you know where the authorities and
powers are because there's obviously
some overlaps and problems we have today
but we'd have to you know have that
sense of what is it that would bind us
what is it that would keep us together
what is it that would benefit us what's
the benefit for Atlantic Canada and
western Canada and central Canada to
come together and this is a conversation
we should should not be afraid to have
as Canadians because this is the best
country in the world I mean you've done
a lot of traveling I've done a little
bit of traveling I've seen places all
around the world this is the best place
in the world we have everything we could
ever want in this in this country we
have all the opportunity and potential
we ever want I mean we're hopelessly
managed at all levels in government but
you know this is why I look at it and
think I don't want to tear this country
apart let's figure out how we actually
strength this country because it can be
such a great place it can be the the
promise quite frankly that it used to be
many many decades ago we have still have
all the the building blocks to be able
to do that well part of the reason I
wanted to talk to you because the the
podcast has a relatively International
audience and so it's always hard to tell
when drawing attention to something
that's somewhat more local is useful and
interesting to that broader audience
although it is also quite peculiar and
noteworthy that Canadian politics have
become of international interest in the
last 10 years that's a real change and
there are real reasons for that and I
think that what's happening in Alberta
and in British Columbia are particularly
emblematic of why Canada has has become
centered in the international Spotlight
and it's because those are the provinces
where the war between the free market
people who believe in private property
and the kind of free trade that allows
people to make choices and genuinely
lifts them out of poverty which we know
beyond a shadow of a doubt especially
after the collapse of the Cold War
the collapse of the Soviet Union in the
1980s and the fact that most most
countries regardless of how
ideologically warped they are started
getting a lot richer when they weren't
outright Communists you really see this
battle playing out in Canada in Alberta
and in British Columbia the battle
between the utopian environment
worshippers of the left and their
de-industrialization strategy and people
who believe more in an English common
law tradition private property and the
free exchange of goods and services free
freedom in a word productive freedom and
and so let let's delve into the
situation in British Columbia now in
British Columbia the Socialists the new
Democratic party in Canada have been in
power how long have they been in power
now in power seven years seven years
okay and so in your estimation what is
the consequence of that well uh when you
look at it I mean our quality of life
has declined we've lost almost 23s of
our forest sector um you know people
aren't investing in mining nobody wants
to invest in this province I think it
was something like 70,000 people left
the province last year a third of
British Colombians were looking at
leaving people can't buy a house um
there is a this huge problem with with
drugs and addiction with their safe
Supply and decriminalization approach
that they've taken which has just
devastated lives and families and
communities and in addition to that um
you know the efforts they're doing with
with indigenous populations First
Nations is actually a direct assault now
on private property rights it's really
quite something to see how this is
changing in the province and people are
waking up and looking thinking wait a
second what's really going on here and I
think that's attributes a lot to why the
conservative party in British Columbia
has risen so rapidly I mean it's it's a
party that's the oldest party of BC's
history it was first founded in 1903 but
it hasn't formed a government since 1927
it hasn't elected anybody since the
1970s so this is a party that's been in
the wilderness but because we're coming
with a very different approach talking
about this there is a huge appetite for
change to move away from these
ideologically driven governments that we
have had into something that's more
focused you know on just the average
everyday person so okay a couple of
issues there so there is this phenomenon
known as the natural resource curse so
economists have studied economies all
around the world and concluded that
polities that are rich in so-called
natural resources are not more likely
than other countries to be wealthy and
this is a very important finding because
another accepted true is on the left is
that wealth is a consequence let's say
of Natural Resources I don't really
believe in the concept of natural
resource at all Air maybe is a natural
resource other than that fresh water
fresh water is not a bloody natural
resource it takes a lot of work to
provide a city with natural with fresh
water and many people around the world
don't have fresh water and certainly uh
fossil fuels and so forth are by no
means natural resources because you have
to discover them and you have to pump
them and you have to refine them and you
have to ship them and then you I might
ask yourself well what is all that
activity dependent on and my sense is
that activity is dependent on while a
complex social environment and one
that's predicated on private property
and diligent work and trust and so the
only real natural resource is one of
trust and then the question becomes how
do you set up the kind of high trust
society that enables people to utilize
what's right in front of them
productively and this is is the war
that's going on in British Columbia now
you said that 2third of the forest
sector for example in British Columbia
has this reminds me I just did a podcast
on Venezuela right 70% of what there's
been a 70% decrease in GDP in Venezuela
and onethird of the population one
quarter of the population actually moved
out of Venezuela like vanished
completely right and so that's a more
extensive form of Socialism but you're
seeing something that's the Canadian
equivalent in British Columbia two
thirds of the forest sector what's
happened to the forest sector well
what's happened is you've had success of
policies that have been brought in by
the NDP that have driven up our costs so
that we are now certainly by a long shot
the highest cost producers um access to
the fiber has been severely restricted
because of these policies that have been
put in place and so you've got a
combination of not being able to access
the wood you need to run a facility and
the cost is so high that you can't make
a go of it and so companies are just
saying I we're out of here we just we're
closing our doors we're leaving and uh
and it's just it's it's wrong we have I
mean Forest Products is the most
sustainable it's the most
environmentally friendly product we can
be producing we as a province in British
Columbia have a tremendous land mass and
a tremendous resource of of of forest
opportunity but it's because of these
ideologies and these these cost- driven
factors it's you've got a government
quite frankly that's more focused on the
environmental movement than they are on
families and workers and communities and
actually providing these products
products that the world needs well and
it's it's the as we pointed out
previously too it's a false
environmentalism because forests can be
managed properly and that can also
reduce their fire risk for example if
it's done well and that it hasn't been
done well at all and there's High fire
risk that's blamed on climate change but
it's much more appropriate and
responsible to blame it on mismanagement
and so and you said a third of British
Colombians are thinking about leaving
and that's absolutely staggering because
all the opportun for British columia to
be as rich as Norway I would say is it's
right there in front of people if
they're willing to take it exactly and
that's and that is you know where when
you got a government that is running
massive deficits that's that's boring
from the future that has you know
believes in everything should be run by
the public service that's you know has
no problem trampling freedoms and no
problem trampling you know de Democratic
process you know and and you have a cost
structure that is going up and a quality
life that's dropping because you've got
low GDP p and people are just saying
okay we're out of here
[Music]